When it comes to the state of planet Earth, scientists and conservationists have highlighted five of the most important good-news stories from 2021:
The ozone layer is healing
It was one of the key environmental causes of the 1980s: trying to prevent the hole in the ozone layer, which protects the planet from harmful UV rays, from getting any larger. Activists mobilised street protests and politicians held summits.

‘Coral IVF’ aids Australia’s Great Barrier Reef
The world’s largest living structure is under threat from rising ocean temperatures linked to climate change, which have caused coral bleaching.

This year, however, has seen some recovery on the Great Barrier Reef. Scientists have been using man-made pools in a process comparable to in vitro fertilisation (IVF), moving eggs from areas of the reef where coral has been growing. These are then transferred in an effort to regenerate areas hit by bleaching or destruction from storms.

The process of assisted spawning, dubbed “coral IVF”, aided the birth of billions of new coral babies this year, in an explosion of colour. The reef is still facing substantial dangers, but scientists and conservationists hope these types of technologies can spur broader recovery in the world’s reefs, home to roughly a quarter of marine life.

China’s giant pandas no longer ‘endangered’
Home to more than 1,800 giant pandas living in the wilderness, China reported in July that the iconic bears are no longer officially “endangered”. Thanks to conservation efforts, they are now classified as just “vulnerable”.

The International Union for Conservation of Nature, an independent tracking group, made a similar assessment several years earlier.

Partial credit for the improvement in the giant panda population can be traced to an expanded network of protected areas in the world’s most populous country, covering about 18 percent of China’s landmass, according to Chinese authorities.

Renewable energy generation hits all-time high
Despite supply chain problems stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic, 2021 was expected to set an all-time high for new renewable energy production capacity.

With new solar installations, wind farms and other technologies, the world added 290 gigawatts of renewable power production capacity this year, according to a report published this month by the Paris-based International Energy Agency. By comparison, that is twice as much as Canada’s total electricity generating capacity of about 145 gigawatts.

Based on these trends, renewable energy capacity could exceed the current global capacity of fossil fuels and nuclear energy combined by 2026. Globally, more than 90 percent of new electricity generating capacity in the next five years is projected to come from renewables. The pace of growth, however, is still not fast enough to reach the goal of net-zero carbon emissions by 2050.

5) Protected area expands around Galapagos Islands
In the 19th century, amazing animal life on the remote Galapagos Islands inspired Charles Darwin to pen On the Origin of Species and pioneer the theory of evolution.

This past November, Ecuador’s president announced that a marine-protected area around the Galapagos would be expanded by 60,000sq km (37,282 sq miles).

Home to giant tortoises, marine iguanas, penguins, sea lions and frigatebirds, among other species, the area is under threat from climate change, illegal fishing and other challenges. Environmentalists hope expanding the protected area will help preserve its unique natural beauty and wildlife.

Climate Activists Charge the Boardroom

A small hedge fund’s successful proxy campaign against oil colossus Exxon Mobil Corp. has shaken up corporate America and provided an example for others to follow. Despite owning just 0.02% of Exxon, Engine No. 1 managed to fill three spots on the company’s 12-member board earlier this year with directors who are more environmentally focused.

Innovators Tackle Marine Garbage

Floating drones inspired by whale sharks are among the many recently developed inventions to remove ocean litter. Tools to monitor, prevent, and clean up marine pollution have grown exponentially over the past four years, according to a paper published in Nature Sustainability in June. The research is the most comprehensive analysis of sea-cleaning solutions to date.


Wolves Roam Colorado Again

After being hunted and trapped to near extinction in the 1940s, wolves are making a comeback in Colorado. Voters there approved a ballot measure in November to reintroduce the animals. In June wildlife biologists spotted a couple of gray wolves who’d wandered across the state border from Wyoming with a litter of at least three pups.

Germany Responds to Youth Movement

In April, Germany’s highest court ruled that the government’s 2019 climate law was incompatible with fundamental freedoms of future generations, a victory for the young German activists who filed the lawsuit. A week later the government announced it would speed its efforts to cut emissions to 65% below 1990 levels by 2030 and achieve climate neutrality by 2045.

Shell Must Try Harder on Emissions

Royal Dutch Shell Plc pledged to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 20% within a decade and reach net-zero before 2050. But that’s not enough, a court in The Hague ruled in May, ordering the oil producer to slash emissions 45% from 2019 levels by 2030. Shell said it would appeal the decision.

No Dark Roofs for Sydney Suburb

All new homes built in a growing Australian community southwest of Sydney will be required to have lighter-colored roofs to reflect heat, plus they’ll need to have a yard big enough for a tree, according to a development plan from the New South Wales government. The rules are meant to help the town of Wilton counteract the urban heat island effect.

Coffee Can Survive Climate Change

Almost all the coffee that people drink comes from just two species of beans, both of which are sensitive to drought and rising temperatures—conditions exacerbated by climate change. But researchers at the U.K.’s Kew Royal Botanic Gardens recently rediscovered a bean in West Africa that not only tolerates high temperatures but also has superior flavor.

Alaska Returns to a More Natural State

The Biden administration suspended new oil and gas leasing in the delicate Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in June. It later announced new protections for the state’s Tongass National Forest, including the cessation of large scale old-growth timber harvesting and the end of a Trump-era decision to allow new road construction in the fragile ecosystem. 

Vietnam Gets Leafier

After the country was battered by record floods and landslides in 2020, Vietnam’s prime minister in April approved a plan to plant a billion trees by 2025. Trees, which absorb water and bind soil, will be distributed to both urban and rural areas. About a third of them will be planted in forests that are protected or designated for wood production. 

No More Leaded Gasoline

The last leaded gasoline refinery in the world, located in Algeria, exhausted its stocks this summer, the United Nations Environment Programme announced in August. The organization said this marks the official end of the fuel, which has been linked to dire health effects such as cognitive issues and permanent nerve damage. 